The authors begin by introducing new fields of mobile computing, mainly text based interactions
like reminders, calendar, chatting or organizing.
Keyboard interaction can be directly interpreted, while pen based input produces digital ink 
which needs to be interpreted. 

Performance is measured with a combination of accuracy and speed, which affect each other.
Text-copying tasks on controlled input hardware are primarily used 

Entry optimization can be done by minimizing users movements or predicting the desired input.
The first one tries to arrange inputs more efficiently while the later uses frequencies within
languages to predict. Therefore corpora are needed reflecting the users needs. 
In order to optimize keyboards for mobile screensambiguity on keypads and techniques like T9 
or using an extra shift-key are used.

QWERTY-layouts can be implemented with hardware keys or software sided. Using half-keyboards
or Five- or Three-Key-layouts reduce the size. Single Hand layouts focus on usability aspects, while
chord typing uses a different approach for text prediction, allowing multiple key to be pressed at once.

Users expect very low input errors for stylus based text entry. Therefore stylized alphabets like Unistroke
or more natural ones like Graffiti are used to help the computer predict desired letters.
Other methods are gesture based inputs like Cirrin, where letters are arranged in a circle requiring the user
to swipe from segment to segment. This and variations like Quickwriting require the users attention at all time
resulting in a non "head-up" text input technique.

Soft keys often use QWERTY or alphabetical arrangements in different sizes and spacings.
Evaluation of their performance is often vague as Fitts Law constants may 
have not been adjusted. Layouts vary from boxes (OPTI), to spread out designs (Cubon) or even radial ones (Hook's
keyboard). Design with 2 layers and a switch (DotNode) are also implemented, allowing for easier one-handed use.
Another input paradigm are predictive input techniques. The Reactive Keyboard uses previous inputs for suggestions
while POBox recommends word based on similar spelling. Keyboards may also change from letters to words
as is presented by Lewis et al. (Lewis, 1999; Lewis et al., 1999a), though new usability problems are introduced.

Error treatment as well as internationalization have to be examined in future works.

SOURCES 

MacKenzie, I. S., & Soukoreff, R. W. (2002). Text entry for mobile computing: Models and methods, theory and practice. Human-Computer Interaction, 17, 147-198.